Proposal to Move Hedera Core Network Software to LFDT (#20)
ryjones/hyperledger-hip: HIPs/hedera-hashgraph.md

- Richard Bair (Hashgraph) [<richard@hashgraph.com>](mailto:richard@hashgraph.com)
- Leemon Baird (Independent) [<leemon@swirldslabs.com>](mailto:leemon@swirldslabs.com)
- Hendrik Ebbers (Hashgraph) [<hendrik.ebbers@hashgraph.com>](mailto:hendrik.ebbers@hashgraph.com)
- May Chan (HashPack) [<may@hashpack.app>](mailto:may@hashpack.app)
- Shyam Nagarajan (IBM) [<shyam@us.ibm.com>](mailto:shyam@us.ibm.com)
- Suma Nair (IBM) [<sumapnair@us.ibm.com>](mailto:sumapnair@us.ibm.com)
- Katerina Sanchez-Schilling (DLT Science Foundation) [<Katerina.Sanchez-Schilling@dltscience.org>](mailto:Katerina.Sanchez-Schilling@dltscience.org)
- Paolo Tasca (DLT Science Foundation) [<pt@dsf.xyz>](mailto:pt@dsf.xyz)
- Nikhil Vadgama (DLT Science Foundation) [<nv@dsf.xyz>](mailto:nv@dsf.xyz)

# Abstract
This proposal outlines the plan to move Hedera’s core network software to the Linux Foundation’s Decentralized Trust Foundation.
The Hedera network is a public distributed ledger technology (DLT) offering high throughput, low latency, and strong security.
We are requesting to contribute Hedera’s core network software which includes our unique hashgraph consensus algorithm

> and related software and governance model to the Decentralized Trust Foundation's ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and related software and governance model to the Linux Fouundation's Decentralized Trust ecosystem.
```

We want to leverage and contribute to the existing community and resources for further development and adoption across
the Decentralized Trust ecosystem in a vendor-neutral process.
Under the new foundation, the project will be rebranded and trademarked as `PROJECT`. 

# Context
`PROJECT` offers a robust decentralized ledger platform leveraging a unique consensus mechanism known as Hashgraph,
which provides asynchronous Byzantine Fault Tolerance (aBFT), making it secure, fast, and fair.

> By joining with the existing Hyperledger project under the umbrella of the Decentralized Trust Foundation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By joining with the existing Hyperledger project under the umbrella of LF Decentralized Trust,
```

`PROJECT` will aim to enhance collaboration with other blockchain and DLT projects,
contribute to the open-source community, and accelerate the adoption of enterprise-grade DLT solutions.

# Dependent Projects
None

# Motivation
Hedera envisions significant mutual benefits by donating the `PROJECT` codebase to LF Decentralized Trust.
Introducing Hedera's advanced consensus algorithm will create synergies between diverse blockchain technologies and

> promote enhanced collaboration and integration both within and outside the LF Decentralized Trust Foundation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
promote enhanced collaboration and integration both within and outside the LF Decentralized Trust.
```

Our contribution will enrich the array of open-source consensus mechanisms, bolstering the versatility and robustness
of its blockchain solutions.
Moreover, Hedera will contribute to ongoing standards development within the community, while also serving as a
vital link to the existing Hedera ecosystem and its Web3 developer community.
This collaboration with the Linux Foundation and its LF Decentralized Trust will also offer Hedera access to a broader
community of enterprise developers and valuable insights into incorporating open-source governance best practices.

Among the primary rationale for moving `PROJECT` to Linux Foundation’s Decentralized Trust includes:
- Enhanced Collaboration: Foster cross-community collaboration with other leading blockchain projects and leverage
  the existing Hyperledger community and governance framework.
- Increased Adoption: Accelerate enterprise adoption through Linux Foundation's established ecosystem and the

>   opportunities presented by enhanced interoperability and purposeful standards .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  opportunities presented by enhanced interoperability and purposeful standards.
```

Consensus and Mirror Nodes to fulfill the JSON RPC Specification.

## Client SDKs (Java, JavaScript, Go, C++, Rust, Swift)
The SDKs for interacting with a `PROJECT` network: the official distributed consensus platform built using the
hashgraph consensus algorithm for fast, fair, and secure transactions.

## Solo
Solo provides a framework and associated tools for conducting end-to-end and full stack tests against a `PROJECT` network.

## Licenses and dependencies of the sub-projects
All sub-projects of `PROJECT` use the Apache license V2.0 (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt).
Since all the subprojects are part of separate repositories and even created in different programming languages,
their dependencies differ. Based on that, it doesn’t make sense to provide a global list of dependencies.
All dependencies and related licenses can be identified by automatic project analysis.
Today, Snyk is used to create automatic dependency and license overviews of the subprojects.
The attached file [`dependencies-client-sdks.csv`](../assets/hedera-licenses-sdks.csv) contains a list of all
dependencies of our SDK projects.

> Next to that, the attached file [`licenses.cvs`](../assets/hedera-licenses.csv) contains an overview of all licenses that

Reviewer: Seeing a few dependencies that are non-permissive (e.g., GPL) in the list. Is there an intention to replace these dependencies with a permissive license dependency?

Author: Can you provide a list of all licences in `hedera-licenses.csv` that are problematic? By doing so we can identify the dependencies and define actions for each of them.

Reviewer: This is a list of licenses from hedera-licenses-sdk.csv:

- ""
- "Apache-2.0, MIT"
- "BSD-2-Clause, MIT, Apache-2.0"
- "BSD-3-Clause, GPL-2.0"
- "BSD-3-Clause, MIT"
- "BSD-3-Clause, Unlicense, Unknown"
- "CDDL-1.1, GPL-2.0-with-classpath-exception"
- "GPL-3.0, LGPL-3.0"
- "MIT, CC0-1.0"
- "WTFPL, MIT"
- 0BSD
- Apache-2.0
- BSD-2-Clause
- BSD-3-Clause
- CC-BY-3.0
- CC-BY-4.0
- CC0-1.0
- EDL-1.0
- GPL-2.0
- ISC
- LGPL-2.1
- LGPL-3.0
- MIT
- MPL-2.0
- Public-Domain
- Python-2.0
- Unknown
- Unlicense

The dependencies with "" or Unknown licenses are something that should be researched to determine what the actual license is.

The lines that have "GPL-2.0"  and "CDDL-1.1" are also of concern as these are non-permissive licenses. There may be others, as I am not familiar with all of these licenses.

Also, are those lines that contain multiple licenses "one-of" or something else?

Reviewer: This is a list of licenses from hedera-licenses.csv:

- "0BSD, BSD-2-Clause"
- "AFL-2.1, BSD-2-Clause"
- "AFL-2.1, BSD-3-Clause"
- "Apache-2.0, BSD-2-Clause"
- "Apache-2.0, BSD-2-Clause, BSD-3-Clause, BSL-1.0, CC0-1.0, MIT"
- "Apache-2.0, BSD-2-Clause, BSD-3-Clause, EDL-1.0, EPL-2.0, GPL-2.0-with-classpath-exception, MIT, Public-Domain, W3C"
- "Apache-2.0, BSD-2-Clause, MIT, Protobuf"
- "Apache-2.0, BSD-3-Clause"
- "Apache-2.0, BSD-3-Clause, MIT"
- "Apache-2.0, EPL-1.0"
- "Apache-2.0, EPL-2.0, GPL-3.0"
- "Apache-2.0, GPL-2.0, MPL-1.1"
- "Apache-2.0, LGPL-2.1"
- "Apache-2.0, LGPL-2.1, MPL-1.1"
- "Apache-2.0, LGPL-3.0"
- "Apache-2.0, LGPL-3.0-or-later"
- "Apache-2.0, LGPL-3.0-or-later, MIT"
- "Apache-2.0, MIT"
- "Apache-2.0, MPL-1.1"
- "BSD-1-Clause, BSD-2-Clause"
- "BSD-1-Clause, BSD-2-Clause-Views"
- "BSD-2-Clause, BSD-3-Clause"
- "BSD-2-Clause, BSD-3-Clause, BSD-3-Clause-No-Military-License"
- "BSD-2-Clause, BSD-3-Clause, HPND"
- "BSD-2-Clause, GPL-2.0-only"
- "BSD-2-Clause, GPL-3.0"
- "BSD-2-Clause, MIT, Apache-2.0"
- "BSD-3-Clause, Apache-2.0"
- "BSD-3-Clause, GPL-2.0"
- "BSD-3-Clause, LGPL-2.1"
- "BSD-3-Clause, MIT"
- "CC-BY-4.0, MIT"
- "CC0-1.0, GPL-2.0-with-classpath-exception"
- "CDDL-1.1, GPL-2.0-with-classpath-exception"
- "CPL-1.0, EPL-1.0, IPL-1.0"
- "EDL-1.0, EPL-1.0"
- "EDL-1.0, EPL-2.0"
- "EPL-1.0, EDL-1.0"
- "EPL-1.0, GPL-2.0, LGPL-2.1"
- "EPL-1.0, LGPL-2.1"
- "EPL-2.0, GPL-2.0-with-classpath-exception"
- "FTL, GPL-2.0"
- "GPL-2.0, MIT"
- "GPL-2.0-with-classpath-exception, CDDL-1.1"
- "GPL-2.0-with-classpath-exception, MIT"
- "GPL-3.0, LGPL-3.0"
- "GPL-3.0, MIT"
- "MIT, Apache-2.0"
- "MIT, BSD-2-Clause"
- "MIT, BSD-3-Clause"
- "MIT, CC0-1.0"
- "MIT, GPL-2.0"
- "MIT, GPL-3.0-or-later"
- "MIT, Unlicense"
- "MIT, WTFPL"
- "MIT, X11"
- "MIT, Zlib"
- "MPL-2.0, EPL-1.0"
- "Ruby, BSD-2-Clause"
- "Ruby, GPL-2.0"
- "Unlicense, Apache-2.0"
- "WTFPL, MIT"
- AGPL-3.0
- ANTLR-PD
- Apache-2.0
- BSD 0.00
- BSD-2-Clause
- BSD-3-Clause
- BSL-1.0
- BlueOak-1.0.0
- CC-BY-3.0
- CC-BY-3.0-US
- CC-BY-4.0
- CC0-1.0
- CDDL-1.0
- CDDL-1.1
- CPL-1.0
- EDL-1.0
- EPL-1.0
- EPL-2.0
- EUPL-1.1
- GPL-2.0
- GPL-2.0-with-classpath-exception
- GPL-3.0
- ISC
- LGPL-2.1
- LGPL-3.0
- MIT
- MIT-0
- MPL-2.0
- ODC-By-1.0
- OpenSSL
- Public-Domain
- Python-2.0
- Unicode-DFS-2016
- Unknown
- Unlicense
- WTFPL
- ZPL-2.1
- Zlib

Reviewer: We should check with LF Legal team on these licenses. cc: @hartm

Reviewer 2: if this conversation goes off GH, please keep me cc'd, I have a bit of background on this topic

Reviewer 2: Tracy, the licenses you reference have modifiers that may be ok with your lawyers, the one I think might be an issue is the CDDL:GPL-2.0-with-classpath-exception, CDDL-1.1,  but as it is dual licensed the exception may make it ok.

Author: @tkuhrt thank you for the input.

we found in dependencies of all sub-projects.
Linux Foundation can receive access to the Snyk reports of the projects or analyze them based on the LF tooling. 

# Effort and Resources

> We propose the creation of the following projects and their repositories GitHub as the initial contributed projects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose the creation of the following projects and their repositories in GitHub as the initial contributed projects:
```

  https://github.com/hashgraph/solo

As shown, the Hedera ecosystem already contains several sub-projects that must be part of `PROJECT`.
All those sub-projects are necessary to deploy and run a full Hashgraph-based network and interact with that network.
All mentioned projects are currently part of the Hashgraph organization at GitHub.
Supplemental repositories include supporting tooling to deploy and validate a network built using the above codebases.
In addition to the aforementioned repositories and projects, the community and ecosystem around Hedera and its unique
hashgraph consensus algorithm is quite extensive, and we will want to transition a number of third-party projects
coming from the community as an initial step once `PROJECT` has been set up. 
An example of such a community project is https://github.com/OpenElements/hedera-enterprise.

## GitHub issues
The Hedera projects use GitHub issues today.
Together, the projects contain more than 1,000 open issues that contain information that should be preserved since they
contain great contributions from the community. Based on that, we propose to migrate the issues to the newly

> created repositories.

Reviewer: "newly created repositories" - will we not directly transfer the repositories from the "hashgraph" organization to the new "PROJECT" organization? What happens with the existing repos?

Author: you are right. It makes more sense to transfer the repositories directly to LF

## GitHub Actions 
Next to the issues, each of the repositories uses GitHub Actions for continuous integration.
While the GitHub Action workflow definitions are stored as part of the repository, we use custom action runners on
hardware in the Google Cloud.
The default GitHub action runners can not be used due to the complexity of `PROJECT`, especially for the services sub-project.
To continue the development of `PROJECT` based on best practices and continuous integration, we propose to set up

> clones of the current hardware and action runners.

Reviewer: Who will fund these runners?

Author: I discussed that with @ryjones, and we will start with runners managed by Hedera. The transition will be easier based on that. I will clarify that in the document.

Reviewer 3: + additional questions:
1. What about the infrastructure for these runners, where will those be installed and run?
2. Does any developer making contributions to the project have access to run these?

The Hedera Hashgraph projects define teams with specific authorities.
Those configurations should be migrated, and maintainers and committers for each sub-project should be defined.
The complete list of GitHub users that should be added as maintainers or committers to the
sub-projects will be submitted later.

## Documentation
The Hedera project provides a repository for the documentation of the Hedera network, including its deployment and
utilization of ever-evolving services.
That repository can be found at https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-docs.
The content of the repository uses gitbook to create complete documentation that is currently hosted
at https://docs.hedera.com/hedera.
We propose to create a neutral hosted version of the documentation at https://docs.PROJECT.com, removing or modifying
existing content that is Hedera specific.
We will work on that directly after the setup to remove all those parts from the transited repository.

## DCO
We suggest setting up a DCO process by LFX for all `PROJECT` repositories.
The DCO documents will be based on the LF templates.

> We will provide the final DCO documents separately.

Reviewer: I don't understand this statement. DCO is provided using the `-s` option on the `git commit` command. If we are transferring repos, we will need to determine how to meet DCO requirements.

Author: We currently use the same GitHub plugin for DCO checks as LF. We will check since what date the plugin is in use and how to handle commits that happened before we used the plugin. I will update the paragraph.

## HIP
The https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal repository contains the Hedera improvement proposals (HIP)
of Hedera.
For `PROJECT` we need improvement proposals and a process for them, too.
Here, the HIP repo should be migrated to https://github.com/PROJECT/PROJECT-improvement-proposal.
Today a frontend showing all HIPs is hosted at https://hips.hedera.com/.

> We propose to host a clone of that at https://NAME.PROJECT.com. 

Reviewer: It is not clear whether this is being transferred or we are setting up a new one specifically for this project while the existing Hedera process remains. Can you clarify?

Author: Good point. I will check if we move the repo or create a new one.

## Build
As you can see in this chapter, `PROJECT` contains many sub-projects that need specific build steps and infrastructure.
Therefore, it is important to invest in `PROJECT`’s build, release, and deployment.
The goal must be to have a vendor-neutral build and release process led by LF.

> We propose to nominate a release manager by LF who is involved in the project’s transition as soon as possible.

Reviewer: "led by LF" -- the LF does not provide the build and release process. This is something that needs to be provided by the project.

"nominate a release manager by LF" - what does the "by LF" mean here? This would be a release manager that is part of the project, not the LF.

Reviewer 2: Tracy, we are in the process of hiring a release engineer who would build and coordinate the release process and "donating" them to our project either as an LF employee or contractor. I have discussed this on a couple of occasions with Daniela and Hart. The only open issue I'm waiting to hear back on is the most effective employment relationship of the resource; LF employee vs LF contractor vs. our employee contracted to the project? I hope that answers your question?

## Slack
With all the given sub-projects and the big community around `PROJECT`, it will be a must to have an open and easy way
to communicate with the community.

> Therefore, we propose to create a `PROJECT` Slack.

Reviewer: We currently use Discord within the community. Is Slack a requirement? Or would Discord work? The problem that we had with Slack in the past is the cost.

Author: Interesting. Discord is quite unusual for me in OSS projects. Slack is not a requirement. I will check that and get back to you with an update. I assume we can even remove that paragraph and start with GitHub discussions on day 1.

Reviewer 2: It was my understanding that some of the projects use slack like Besu?

## GitHub applications

> We have several GitHub applications that are used in the repositories today.

Reviewer: Do you have a list of these applications which are currently in use?

Author: I will create a list and add it to the proposal

Author: All applications that are current used in the hashgraph org:

CircleCI Checks
Codacy Production
Codecov
Common Room
DCO
[Gitbook.com](http://gitbook.com/)
Linear
[monday.com](http://monday.com/)
Netlify
Notion
Semgrep-app
Slack
SonarCloud
StepSecurity Actions Security
Terraform Cloud
Vercel
WIP
Wiz Inc.

Reviewer: @ryjones : Can you comment on use of the above applications within LF and LFDT?

Reviewer 4: @tkuhrt if they don't cost anything, my answer is "yes'

### MirrorNode
- Documentation for hosting: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-mirror-node/blob/main/docs/installation.md 
- Documentation for configuration: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-mirror-node/blob/main/docs/configuration.md

### JSON-RPC-Relay
- Documentation for hosting: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-json-rpc-relay 
- Documentation for configuration: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-json-rpc-relay/blob/main/docs/configuration.md

### MirrorNodeExplorer 
- Documentation for hosting:  https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-mirror-node-explorer?tab=readme-ov-file#run-in-kubernetes
- Documentation for configuration: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-mirror-node-explorer?tab=readme-ov-file#configuration

# References
- Hedera Documentation: https://docs.hedera.com/hedera (based on sources at https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-docs).
- Description of Hedera and Hashgraph Technologies by Dr. Leemon Baird at Harvard: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IjQkag6VOo0
- The Hashgraph Consensus Algorithm: https://www.swirlds.com/downloads/SWIRLDS-TR-2016-01.pdf

# Closure

> The successful migration of `PROJECT` to the Linux Foundation’s Decentralized Trust Foundation will be measured through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The successful migration of `PROJECT` to the Linux Foundation’s Decentralized Trust will be measured through
```

several key metrics and outcomes.

**Community Engagement and Growth**
- Increased contributions from a diverse set of developers and organizations.
- Active participation in discussions, issue reporting, and pull requests on GitHub.
- Growth in the number of maintainers and contributors over time.
- Number of new distributed applications running on the network.

**Adoption and Usage**
- The number of enterprises and projects integrating or deploying `PROJECT` technology.
- Case studies and success stories showcasing the practical applications and benefits of the technology.

**Release and Development Milestones**
- Successful completion of key development milestones and release of new versions.
- Adherence to project roadmaps and timelines, with transparent and regular updates to the community.

**Governance and Process Integration**

> - Seamless integration into the Decentralized Trust Foundation governance model, including the establishment of a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Seamless integration into the LF Decentralized Trust's governance model, including the establishment of a
```

  Technical Steering Committee (TSC) and adherence to its project lifecycle guidelines.
- Successful setup and use of Linux Foundation tools and processes, including CI/CD pipelines, issue tracking,
  and documentation hosting.

**Collaborative Efforts**

> - Collaborative initiatives and synergy with the broader Decentralized Trust Foundation ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Collaborative initiatives and synergy with the broader LF Decentralized Trust ecosystem.
```

- Contributions to and from other open-source projects, fostering a rich, collaborative environment.

By tracking these metrics and continuously engaging with the community, we can ensure that `PROJECT` thrives within

> the Decentralized Trust Foundation, driving innovation and adoption in the distributed ledger technology space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LF Decentralized Trust, driving innovation and adoption in the distributed ledger technology space.
```

community of enterprise developers and valuable insights into incorporating open-source governance best practices.

Among the primary rationale for moving `PROJECT` to Linux Foundation’s Decentralized Trust includes:
- Enhanced Collaboration: Foster cross-community collaboration with other leading blockchain projects and leverage
  the existing Hyperledger community and governance framework.
- Increased Adoption: Accelerate enterprise adoption through Linux Foundation's established ecosystem and the
  opportunities presented by enhanced interoperability and purposeful standards.
- Resource Sharing: Benefit from shared development resources, tooling, and infrastructure provided by
  Linux Foundation’s Decentralized Trust.
- Vendor Neutrality: Ensure a vendor-neutral governance model that promotes equal participation from all
  community members, mitigating the risk of any single entity exerting undue influence over the project.
  This fosters a more open and inclusive environment, encouraging broader industry participation and trust in 
  the project’s development and deployment.

# Status

> We acknowledge that all projects entering Hyperledger start with Incubation status.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We acknowledge that all projects entering LF Decentralized Trust start with Incubation status.
```

establish the cost of transactions.

## JSON-RPC-Relay
Allows Ethereum clients to interact with a `PROJECT` network.
This project is an implementation of the Ethereum JSON RPC APIs that delegates to both the
Consensus and Mirror Nodes to fulfill the JSON RPC Specification.

## Client SDKs (Java, JavaScript, Go, C++, Rust, Swift)
The SDKs for interacting with a `PROJECT` network: the official distributed consensus platform built using the
hashgraph consensus algorithm for fast, fair, and secure transactions.

## Solo
Solo provides a framework and associated tools for conducting end-to-end and full stack tests against a `PROJECT` network.

## Licenses and dependencies of the sub-projects
All sub-projects of `PROJECT` use the Apache license V2.0 (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt).
Since all the subprojects are part of separate repositories and even created in different programming languages,
their dependencies differ. Based on that, it doesn’t make sense to provide a global list of dependencies.
All dependencies and related licenses can be identified by automatic project analysis.

> Today, Snyk is used to create automatic dependency and license overviews of the subprojects.

Reviewer 3: Question:
How is the Snyk generated report analyzed or assessed? Is the tool also configured to flag (potentially as part of the CI process) the new dependency introduction that do not follow expected license?

Author: I will check and come back with more details.

The attached file [`dependencies-client-sdks.csv`](../assets/hedera-licenses-sdks.csv) contains a list of all
dependencies of our SDK projects.

> Next to that, the attached file [`licenses.cvs`](../assets/hedera-licenses.csv) contains an overview of all licenses that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next to that, the attached file [`licenses.csv`](../assets/hedera-licenses.csv) contains an overview of all licenses that
```

- `https://github.com/PROJECT/SUBPROJECT` - This repository contains the Swift SDK that today can be found at https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-sdk-swift
- `https://github.com/PROJECT/SUBPROJECT` - This repository contains the Rust SDK that today can be found at https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-sdk-rust
- `https://github.com/PROJECT/SUBPROJECT` - This repository contains the Java SDK that today can be found at https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-sdk-java
- `https://github.com/PROJECT/SUBPROJECT` - This repository contains the Go SDK that today can be found at
  https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-sdk-go
- `https://github.com/PROJECT/SUBPROJECT` - This repository contains the C++ SDK that today can be found at https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-sdk-cpp
- `https://github.com/PROJECT/SUBPROJECT` - This repository contains the Solo CLI that today can be found at
  https://github.com/hashgraph/solo

As shown, the Hedera ecosystem already contains several sub-projects that must be part of `PROJECT`.
All those sub-projects are necessary to deploy and run a full Hashgraph-based network and interact with that network.

> All mentioned projects are currently part of the Hashgraph organization at GitHub.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All the mentioned projects are currently part of the Hashgraph organization on GitHub.
```

> Supplemental repositories include supporting tooling to deploy and validate a network built using the above codebases.

Reviewer 3: Question:
Are these supplementary repositories currently part of the open-source hashgraph GitHub org? If yes, is there a plan to bring them as well to the LFDT?

Author: The hashgraph org currently contains way more repositories as we mentioned in this proposal. The mentioned repos here are the ones that we want to migrate "at the start". So yes, we plan to bring them to the LFDT. We will add more detail regarding the mentioned repos.

coming from the community as an initial step once `PROJECT` has been set up. 
An example of such a community project is https://github.com/OpenElements/hedera-enterprise.

## GitHub issues
The Hedera projects use GitHub issues today.
Together, the projects contain more than 1,000 open issues that contain information that should be preserved since they
contain great contributions from the community.
By transferring the repositories to the new GitHub organization all issues will be transferred, too.

## GitHub Actions 
Next to the issues, each of the repositories uses GitHub Actions for continuous integration.
While the GitHub Action workflow definitions are stored as part of the repository, we use custom action runners on
hardware in the Google Cloud.
The default GitHub action runners can not be used due to the complexity of `PROJECT`, especially for the services sub-project.
To continue the development of `PROJECT` based on best practices and continuous integration, we propose to set up
clones of the current hardware and action runners.
The Hedera Hashgraph projects define teams with specific authorities.

> Those configurations should be migrated, and maintainers and committers for each sub-project should be defined.

Reviewer 3: Thank you, please also work towards a process for maintainer's journey within the project.

Author: @arsulegai I already updated the text regarding the action runners. Can you please check if the new version fits you?

Author: > a process for maintainer's journey

What do you mean with that comment?

Reviewer 3: @hendrikebbers , I was referring to setting up a document for new contributors. They will use this document to learn how can they become one the maintainers someday with their persistent contribution efforts.

Reviewer 3: > @arsulegai I already updated the text regarding the action runners. Can you please check if the new version fits you?

Thank you for clarifying that Hedera will continue to provide these runners on Google Cloud. It would be helpful to state the reason for this requirement either in a project's improvement plan or as an issue within the project's repositories. Future developers or contributors can reference the document to understand and eventually remove these runners' dependency.

The complete list of GitHub users that should be added as maintainers or committers to the
sub-projects will be submitted later.

## Documentation
The Hedera project provides a repository for the documentation of the Hedera network, including its deployment and
utilization of ever-evolving services.
That repository can be found at https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-docs.
The content of the repository uses gitbook to create complete documentation that is currently hosted
at https://docs.hedera.com/hedera.
We propose to create a neutral hosted version of the documentation at https://docs.PROJECT.com, removing or modifying
existing content that is Hedera specific.
We will work on that directly after the setup to remove all those parts from the transited repository.

## DCO
All repos use the same DCO check as LF as part of the CI pipeline.
Based on that we can easily migrate the DCO process to LF for all repositories.

> We do not had DCO check in use for all repositories under https://github.com/hashgraph/ from the beginning.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We did not have DCO check in use for all repositories under https://github.com/hashgraph/ from the beginning.
```

---
layout: default
title: PROJECT
parent: Hyperledger Improvement Proposals
---

# Sponsor(s)
- Alex Popowycz (Hedera) [<a@hedera.com>](mailto:a@hedera.com)
- Samson Goddy (Hedera) [<samson@hedera.com>](mailto:samson@hedera.com)
- Richard Bair (Hashgraph) [<richard@hashgraph.com>](mailto:richard@hashgraph.com)
- Leemon Baird (Independent) [<leemon@swirldslabs.com>](mailto:leemon@swirldslabs.com)
- Hendrik Ebbers (Hashgraph) [<hendrik.ebbers@hashgraph.com>](mailto:hendrik.ebbers@hashgraph.com)
- May Chan (HashPack) [<may@hashpack.app>](mailto:may@hashpack.app)
- Shyam Nagarajan (IBM) [<shyam@us.ibm.com>](mailto:shyam@us.ibm.com)
- Suma Nair (IBM) [<sumapnair@us.ibm.com>](mailto:sumapnair@us.ibm.com)
- Katerina Sanchez-Schilling (DLT Science Foundation) [<Katerina.Sanchez-Schilling@dltscience.org>](mailto:Katerina.Sanchez-Schilling@dltscience.org)
- Paolo Tasca (DLT Science Foundation) [<pt@dsf.xyz>](mailto:pt@dsf.xyz)
- Nikhil Vadgama (DLT Science Foundation) [<nv@dsf.xyz>](mailto:nv@dsf.xyz)

# Abstract

> This proposal outlines the plan to move Hedera’s core network software to the Linux Foundation’s Decentralized Trust Foundation.

Reviewer 5: would be good to clarify what `core network software` means, in particular whether this will provide a complete set of components to stand up a Hedera network?

Author: All projects that are necessary to deploy and run a full network and interact with that network.

The Hedera network is a public distributed ledger technology (DLT) offering high throughput, low latency, and strong security.
We are requesting to contribute Hedera’s core network software which includes our unique hashgraph consensus algorithm
and related software and governance model to the Linux Fouundation's Decentralized Trust ecosystem.
We want to leverage and contribute to the existing community and resources for further development and adoption across
the Decentralized Trust ecosystem in a vendor-neutral process.
Under the new foundation, the project will be rebranded and trademarked as `PROJECT`. 

# Context
`PROJECT` offers a robust decentralized ledger platform leveraging a unique consensus mechanism known as Hashgraph,
which provides asynchronous Byzantine Fault Tolerance (aBFT), making it secure, fast, and fair.
By joining with the existing Hyperledger project under the umbrella of LF Decentralized Trust,
`PROJECT` will aim to enhance collaboration with other blockchain and DLT projects,
contribute to the open-source community, and accelerate the adoption of enterprise-grade DLT solutions.

# Dependent Projects

> None

Reviewer 6: Consensus node and Mirror node use Besu's EVM.  Mirror node uses Web3j.

Reviewer 5: thanks @shemnon, I had the exact same question and now you just answered it.

Author: You are right. I will fix that

Reviewer 4: this change was made

Only projects that already have a specific need based on their dependencies or programming language are more restricted.
An example is the Swift SDK, which needs macOS to be built.

The projects differ greatly in deployment and hosting, so `PROJECT` will contain libraries that are only
used as 3rd party dependencies in external projects next to full backend services and web applications.
Each project type is described in the sections below.

All projects provide GitHub actions for release automation.
That automation includes tagging the project, signing artifacts, and creating release notes.
Some of those steps need specific and secret environment variables like GitHub tokens.
All the tokens need to be created for the new repositories to support the release of the software.

## SDKs
All SDK projects and some other repositories provide workflows to deploy the build artifacts of a release to a global
registry, like Maven Central or NPM, which require accounts and tokens.
Here we propose to create new accounts and tokens in all needed registries to upload all releases done under `PROJECT`
in new namespaces of `PROJECT`.

## Consensus Node

> The Consensus Node project defines the software that is running on each node of a network.

Reviewer 7: I didn't see a Consensus Node project in the list of github repositories above.
Is this https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-services? If so it would be helpful to indicate this in the github repository description above.

Author: yes, you are right. "Hedera-services" contains the code of a consensus-node and i personally hope that we can name it better under LF ;)
